Aim: To install MongoDB in windows O.S and use of basic commands though  
MongoDB command line interface.  

THEORY: 
 
What is MongoDB?  
MongoDB is a well-known open-source NoSQL database built on the C++ programming language.  
MongoDB is a document-oriented database that uses JSON-like documents and a Dynamic Schema to store  
information. It means that while saving your data, you won’t have to worry about the Data Structure, the  
number of fields or the types of fields used to store values. JSON objects are identical to MongoDB  
Documents.  
Database development of modern software that utilizes transactional processing involves making some  
tradeoffs in terms of scalability and performance on one end and integrity on the other. These two things 
are peculiar to NoSQL and SQL databases, respectively. However, MongoDB, being a NoSQL database, 
provides both Graphical and Command-line interfaces (Windows MongoDB Shell) for interacting with 
your  database.  
MongoDB is a document-oriented database created by MongoDB Inc to provide software database services.  
It is classified as a NoSQL database due to its document-oriented nature. Meanwhile, MongoDB documents  
are represented in a JSON-like structure.  
MongoDB provides shell interactions via tools like Mongo and mongosh. MongoDB shell or mongosh is  a 
superset of mongo providing improved syntax highlighting, command history, and improved logging.  
Mongosh works typically like mongo so a user doesn’t have to learn new syntax.  

Key Features of MongoDB  

In comparison to other traditional databases, MongoDB has a number of unique features that make it a  
superior choice. The following are some of these attributes:  

Index-based Document: In a MongoDB database, every field in the Document is indexed with Primary 
and  Secondary Indices, making it easier to get data from the pool.  

Horizontal Scalability: It is possible with MongoDB’s sharding. The practice of distributing data over  
numerous servers is known as sharding. The Shard Key is used to partition a huge quantity of data into data  
chunks, which are then uniformly dispersed among Shards that span several Physical Servers.  

Schema-Less Database: This type of Database stores many sorts of documents in a single collection (the  
equivalent of a table). To put it another way, a single collection in the MongoDB database can hold numerous  
documents, each having its own set of Fields, Content, and Size. It is not required that one document be  
comparable to another, as it is with Relational Databases. MongoDB provides a lot of freedom to consumers  
because of this capability.  

Replication: MongoDB provides high availability of data by generating several copies of the data and  
sending these copies to a separate Server, allowing the data to be retrieved even if one server fails  

Installing MongoDB  
To start with Windows MongoDB Shell installation you need to have MongoDB installed in the first place.  
If you don’t already have MongoDB installed on your computer, the first section will put you through just  
before moving on to the installation of the MongoDB shell.



1)If you want to check your databases list, use the command show dbs.   

2)The use Command  
MongoDB use DATABASE_NAME is used to create database. The command will create a new database  
if it doesn't exist, otherwise it will return the existing database.  
Syntax  
Basic syntax of use DATABASE statement is as follows with following 
screenshot use DATABASE_NAME 

3)The createCollection() Method 
MongoDB db.createCollection(name, options) is used to create collection.  
Syntax  
Basic syntax of createCollection() command is as follows −  
db.createCollection(name, options)  
In the command, name is name of collection to be created. Options is a document and is used to specify  
configuration of collection.  

4)The insert() Method  
To insert data into MongoDB collection, you need to use MongoDB's insert() method.  
In the inserted document, if we don't specify the _id parameter, then MongoDB assigns a unique ObjectId  
for this document.  
_id is 12 bytes hexadecimal number unique for every document in a collection 

5) The find() Method  
To query data from MongoDB collection, you need to use MongoDB's find() 
method. Syntax  
The basic syntax of find() method is as follows −  
>db.COLLECTION_NAME.find()  
find() method will display all the documents in a non-structured way. 

6) The pretty() Method  
To display the results in a formatted way, you can use pretty() method.  
Syntax  
>db.COLLECTION_NAME.find().pretty() 

 
7) MongoDB Statistics  
To get stats about MongoDB server, type the command db.stats() in MongoDB client. This will show the  
database name, number of collection and documents in the database. Output of the command is shown in  
the following screenshot. 

 
8) MongoDB Help  
To get a list of commands, type db.help() in MongoDB client. This will give you a list of commands as  
shown in the following screenshot. 


command

show dbs
use ShrutikaBDA
db.createCollection("product")
db.product.insert({"item":"box","qty":200,tested:"yes"})
db.product.find()
db.product.find().pretty()
db.stats()
db.help()