Aim: To implement the Cloudera Data Platform (CDP) and analyze the working 
of Cloudera Manager in a distributed environment & also use basic hadoop 
command using cloudera terminal. 

THEORY: 
Introduction: Cloudera is a leading provider of a cloud-native data management and analytics platform 
that delivers machine learning, analytics, and operational services. It specializes in enterprise data 
management solutions based on Apache Hadoop and other open-source technologies. Cloudera empowers 
organizations to manage, process, and analyze large-scale data (Big Data) in distributed environments. 

Key Components of Cloudera 

1. Cloudera Data Platform (CDP): Cloudera Data Platform (CDP) is a comprehensive platform that 
allows organizations to manage data from on-premises to multi-cloud environments. It provides a 
unified and secure platform for data analytics, enabling modern data-driven operations. 

2. Cloudera Distribution for Hadoop (CDH): CDH is Cloudera's open-source distribution of Apache 
Hadoop, bundled with enterprise features like security, management, and high availability. CDH 
includes core Hadoop components (HDFS, MapReduce, YARN) and additional tools such as Apache 
Hive, HBase, Impala, and Spark. 

3. Cloudera Manager: Cloudera Manager is the central management tool provided by Cloudera for 
deploying, configuring, managing, and monitoring clusters. It allows for streamlined Hadoop 
ecosystem deployment and cluster lifecycle management through a web-based interface. 

4. Cloudera Navigator: Cloudera Navigator is a part of the platform that enables data governance, 
compliance, and security. It provides features like auditing, lineage tracking, and encryption to ensure 
that enterprise data is well-governed. 

5. Cloudera Data Engineering (CDE): CDE is a modern platform for building, running, and managing 
data pipelines with the use of Apache Spark in the cloud or on-premises. It integrates with existing 
CDP environments and simplifies the process of creating scalable data workflows.

6. Cloudera Data Warehouse (CDW): CDW is a service that enables data warehousing in a cloud
native architecture. It leverages the power of SQL-based engines like Apache Hive and Impala to 
process structured and semi-structured data at a large scale. 

7. Cloudera Machine Learning (CML): CML is Cloudera’s machine learning platform that enables 
building, training, and deploying machine learning models at scale. It supports the entire ML lifecycle, 
from data preparation to model training and inference, in a secure and governed environment. 

8. Cloudera DataFlow (CDF): CDF is a tool used for collecting, curating, and analyzing real-time data 
streams. It is powered by Apache NiFi and provides a way to process large volumes of streaming data 
from different sources in real time. 

Features of Cloudera 

1. Scalability: Cloudera’s platform is designed to handle petabytes of data across distributed clusters. 
It provides seamless scalability to meet growing data demands. 

2. Unified Data Management: Cloudera enables management of structured, semi-structured, and 
unstructured data across the entire data lifecycle. This makes it suitable for diverse data types and 
sources. 

3. Data Security and Governance: Cloudera’s platform has built-in security and governance tools 
such as Cloudera Navigator for ensuring compliance, managing data privacy, and tracking data 
lineage. 

4. Enterprise-Grade Management: Cloudera Manager simplifies the deployment and management 
of Hadoop clusters with features like automated configuration, performance monitoring, and service 
management. 

5. Support for Hybrid and Multi-Cloud Deployments: Cloudera offers flexibility for hybrid and 
multi-cloud environments, enabling organizations to deploy and manage workloads across on
premises, public, and private clouds. 





Command:

ls
hdfs dfs -ls
cd hadoop
ls
vi hello.txt
ls
cat hello.txt
	Hello i am sghrutika
hdfs dfs -mkdir /shrutika
hdfs dfs -put hello.txt /shrutika/data.txt
hdfs dfs -cat /shrutika/data.txt
ls
hdfs dfs -cp /shrutika/data.txt /input/data.txt
hdfs dfs -cat /input/data.txt
ls
cat data.txt
hdfs dfs -get /input/data.txt
ls
vi data.txt
cat data.txt