Aim: To understand and implement basic image processing operations in 
Python using the OpenCV library. Specifically, we aim to perform the following 
operations: conversion to grayscale, obtaining the complement of an image and 
creating a binary image.


THEORY: 
 
➢ Grayscale 
Gray scaling is the process of converting an image from other color spaces e.g., RGB, CMYK, HSV, etc. 
to shades of gray. It varies between complete black and complete white. 
Importance of gray scaling: 
Dimension reduction: For example, In RGB images there are three color channels and three dimensions 
while grayscale images are single-dimensional. 
Reduces model complexity: Consider training neural articles on RGB images of 10x10x3 pixels. The input 
layer will have 300 input nodes. On the other hand, the same neural network will need only 100 input 
nodes for grayscale images. 
For other algorithms to work: Many algorithms are customized to work only on grayscale images e.g., the 
Canny edge detection function pre-implemented in the OpenCV library works on Grayscale images only. 
 
ALGORITHM: 
Step 1: Open the CV library installed as CV2 in Python. 
Step 2: Import the cv2 library into this program. 
Step 3: Use to read the image in grayscale mode. 
Step 4: Displaying the image


Complement of an Image 
A complementary image is a transformed image such that it consists of complementary colours of the ones, 
which is present in the original image. 
For finding the complement of an image, we have to simply subtract each pixel value from the maximum 
pixel value supported by the class. (In this case, class - uint8, the maximum value of pixel can be 255) and 
store in the output image array. In the output image, dark areas become lighter and light areas become 
darker. 
ALGORITHM: 
 Step 1: open-cv library is installed as cv2 in python 
Step 2: import the cv2 library into this program. 
Step 3: read an image using imread( ) function of cv2. 
Step 4: Find complements of the image array and store it in the variable. 
Step 5: Show the image formed. 


Binary image 
 
Binary Image Operations are a collection of digital filters, image arithmetic, and image processing 
techniques. Apply simple modifications such as open and fill holes to count the number of cells. Develop 
complex Work files that utilize multiple binary layers to differentiate nuclei inside cells. 
The difference between the Grayscale image and Binary image. Binary image has only two colors: white 
and black. The pixel values of the Binary image are either 0 (black) or 255 (white). 
 
ALGORITHM: 
Step 1: import required libraries 
Step 2: load the input image using imread function. 
Step 3: convert the input image to grayscale. 
Step 4: apply thresholding to convert grayscale to binary image 
Step 5: Display the Binary Image





CODE:

GrayScale

import cv2
path=r"D:\PyCharm\Practical 3\Lotus.jpg"
img=cv2.imread(path,3)
cv2.imshow('image', img)
cv2.waitKey(0)
cv2.destroyAllWindows()



Complement

import cv2
img = cv2.imread("D:\PyCharm\Practical 3\Lotus.jpg")
cv2.imshow('original image',img)
cv2.waitKey(0)
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
comp_image = 255 -img
cv2.imshow("Complementry image", comp_image)
cv2.waitKey(0)
cv2.destroyAllWindows()



Binary

import cv2
img = cv2.imread("D:\PyCharm\Practical 3\Lotus.jpg")
gray = cv2.cvtColor(img, cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
ret, thresh = cv2.threshold(gray,70,255,0)
cv2.imshow("Binary Image", thresh)
cv2.waitKey(0)
cv2.destroyAllWindows()





